# A Place by Any Other Name: Toponymics as a medium of public history

_This paper was written in April 2021 as the final paper for my American Public History Class_

---

Place names are one of the most tangible forms of memory. Toponyms are the names given to places such as town, streets, and buildings, are toponymics is the study of and practice of establishing toponyms. Although historical texts are more comprehensive and museums are more immersive, place names are also important mediums of public memory due to their scale and durability. The language we use to refer to a location every day is fundamental to the way we think about the memory associated with that place or name. The author of Oregon Geographic Names, Lewis McArthur, goes as far as to say, “without names you have nothing; you can't ... really think about your own locality without names, without some way to identify things. And that takes you into the place. You have to have names to develop your history” (Peneva). Beyond the identification and contextualization of a place, toponyms are one of the most direct forms of interaction possible between today’s society and the predecessors who bestowed these names. Our continuation in using these names or actions we take to change them are an expression of the views which we hold concerning our history. Sometimes it works the other way around, with proposals to change toponyms and the resulting controversy provoking historical inquiry and consequently a deeper understanding of the history involved.

The names we give to locations last a long time, but not forever. Eventually, there comes a movement to either preserve or alter the place’s name, either through formal government action or through gradual social trends. Our participation in or opposition to these events reveals how we feel about the history surrounding the location. Conversely, the names of places can influence our respective feelings. Therefore, when analyzing the role of toponymics in public memory as in this report, more attention should be paid to instances when the names of places changed, or when a change was possible.

Names are a crucial part of our thought process and influence the way we perceive the world. When giving a name to a place or using that name, we express what we view as noteworthy traits by pointing out identifying and distinguishing characteristics. A person’s name indicates their family, a food’s name gives hints to its flavor, and the name given to a place will also indicate what are deemed the most significant identifiers and unique traits of that place. An extension of this convention is that we may view the world from the perspective of our ancestors through toponyms which have lasted for a long time. The names they gave to places signify the most important aspect of the place from their point of view, which indicates what was important to them and may differ or be in accordance with current perceptions.

Toponyms are more palpable than other, more subtle mediums of public memory. The name of a place offers as much information about the history of a location—and the namesake—as it does about the place’s physical aspects. According to Oregon Geographic Names, about a quarter of all place names in Oregon are honorary in nature (McArthur 7). Humans have a persistent desire to be remembered, and toponyms are the most potent medium for this kind of commemoration due to their constant usage and durability. Interaction between today’s society and its predecessors is most easily conducted through our language. European settlers had a distinctly gendered and racialized world view, and the toponyms they established are evidence of the social norms of the time. The exploration of North America coincided with a popular practice of naming places after Christian saints. This resulted in a ‘hagiotoponym,’ or a religious place name (Beck). The importance of males in Christianity also caused over three-quarters of all place names of the period to refer to men (Beck). These tendencies are far less prominent today, but the place names they left behind do not seem out of place. By using the same language, we integrate some of the past into the present. The frequency of usage of place names diffuses previous public sentiment into today, even if the original namesake has been forgotten. Our continual usage of these toponyms is as close as we can get to interacting face to face with our predecessors.  

In determining the power of any form of memorial, scale is an important factor. Place names are used frequently and by many people, so the scale at which the public interacts with toponyms gives them very strong influence. In the pursuit of analyzing the practice of naming streets after Martin Luther King, Jr., Derek Alderman places a large focus on the scale of memorialization. He says the scale of memorials largely “determines…the populations who will be touched by the memorial meanings being communicated” (Alderman 165). Most of the country would not regard historical texts as page-turners, and museums are an occasional excursion, therefore the potency of both of these forms of memorial is limited by their scale and reach. Place names, however, are used every day and in many different contexts. 

The toponym ‘Columbia’ is “one of the most abundantly used geographic names in America. Aside from the beauty of the word, its history reflects efforts to honor the achievements of Christopher Columbus” (McArthur 170). Columbus is one of the most commemorated people in the United States. However, he is position in memory is quickly shifting to the most hated. The recent movement to rename Washington, District of Columbia to Washington, Douglass Commonwealth is one of the largest-scale memorializations of recent times (“Congressman Max Rose”).

The power of toponyms as a channel of interaction between the America of today and Americas past also means that toponymics can be used strategically to influence public perceptions of contemporary topics by changing the public’s interaction with its history.

The proposal to rename D.C. is included in a bill which would grant statehood to the capital of the United States. The bestowing of statehood and a new name serve the same purpose: to acknowledge that the world has changed since the country’s conception, and to take positive action to correct outdated remainders of the country’s early history. Residents of the city are not allowed voting rights, which may have seemed fair when the rule was established, but the law now disenfranchises a disproportionately African American population. Proponents of the bill say that this outdatedness is also reflected in the name, and “view it as racist or at least insensitive to name the locale after Christopher Columbus and prefer the capital to be names after a…national abolitionist leader” (“Congressman Max Rose”). This decision to rename the capital is strategic in that it places a larger social significance on social justice leaders rather than misrepresented conquerors. The name change pushes the public to favor political movements which create social change rather than idealist nationalism which was manifested in the name ‘Columbia.’

Memorials commemorating Martin Luther King Jr. are widely appreciated, but actual attempts to do so are often politicized and hard to execute. This is due to a schism between white Americans, who do not personally identify with King or his teachings, and black Americans and other people of color who were greatly affected by his work. The disconnect in relatability leads to roadblocks in his commemoration, often leading to his memorialization being isolated to African American communities (Alderman). Concerns about how best to continue MLK’s work through his commemoration are an obstacle; some say that spreading awareness to the entire country will help reduce racial barriers, and other say that using him as a role model within the black community would be the most productive course of action (Alderman). The first solution would attempt to promote equality by easing difficulties in borders between races. The second would help black Americans greater overcome those difficulties. Both utilize place names to mark the reach and widespread affect of King’s teachings, evidenced by the fact that King’s name has been attached to 483 streets in the US as of 1996 (Alderman).

History is more than a compilation of facts about the past, it changes based on the experiences of the audience. This means that different populations can have different forms of history. Place names are commonly used by everybody, regardless of demographic, so issues surrounding toponyms cause people to take the side which supports their version of history. One attribute which make toponyms so powerful in influencing public memory is their ability to make history retrievable and accessible. However, there are disagreements about the best way to go about this. There are different, and often conflicting, perceptions of the effect of Martin Luther King’s leadership in the civil rights movement. Views held by non-blacks tend to be that his impact mostly affected the African American community, whereas black Americans tend to agree that he was an important figure for the entire nation. (Alderman) Such differing perspectives is largely a result of contrasting experiences with discrimination. The same mechanisms lead Columbus’s history among Italian-Americans to be incompatible with his history among Native Americans. In disagreements between groups which have different forms of history, toponyms are the ultimate prize because they represent the consensus of a society.

Some forms of commemoration can also degrade the memory of a historical figure. Projects to memorialize Martin Luther King in street names commonly aspire to pay homage with a major thoroughfare. However, these ambitions are usually rejected, and are given suggestions to instead rename a less significant street. In Athens, Georgia, “African Americans opposed identifying King with their street, which they described as ‘unknown’ and ‘drug-infested’” (Alderman). One such leader of a street-naming campaign responded to a counterproposal for a smaller street by saying “I think Dr. King should have a major road…I think having a road in a low-class neighborhood named after King is offensive” (Alderman). When such a road is dedicated to King, it undermines the work he did and forces up him and other African Americans the very stereotypes he sought to abolish. Similar sentiments make the proposal to rename Washington D.C. unpopular among Italian-Americans who view Columbus as “a symbol of ethnic pride” (“Congressman Max Rose”). Whereas King’s memory would be tarnished by a lack of scale of his commemoration, removing Columbus’ name from the capital of the country would use large scale against his memory. 

Changing the name given to a place or otherwise drawing attention to it creates a teachable moment which provokes a deeper understanding of the associated history. Toponyms are resistant to changing naturally, which leads to lasting memorials which do not reflect modern values. This also means that people tend not to question place names which have been around for a long time, but when special interest is applied to these forms of commemoration it is usually followed by alteration.

Yale has been renaming much of their campus recently. In addition to discouraging the use of the term ‘freshman,’ they have renamed their Calhoun College. The original John C. Calhoun was a South Carolinian slave trader and staunch supporter of slavery. The undergraduate residence took his name in 1932 because of his financial contributions to the college, which was very young at the time. Yale initially resisted calls to rename the college, saying that removing Calhoun’s name would “obscure the legacy of slavery rather than address it” (“Yale’s smart choice”). After pressure from the students, there was a historical investigation which revealed that naming the college after Calhoun was a controversial decision in 1932, and the residence was renamed “Amazing Grace” after “an alumna famous for her work in computer science” (“Yale’s smart choice”). 

Calhoun is an example of how perceptions of history can be distorted over time. It is known that, in the past, there were periods when slavery was socially accepted and times when it was not. Over time, all history tends to be compressed. A person who advocated for slavery when it was legal nationwide is viewed in a different light than someone who held the same views while abolitionism was the most common opinion. Controversial people who have places named after them tend to get the benefit of the doubt and are viewed as products of their time. This was the initial response to protests against Calhoun College, but inquisition eventually revealed that Calhoun “was an active proponent of slavery when many condemned it—and he is remembered for, above anything else, his staunch opposition to abolition” (“Yale’s smart choice”). By naming a residence after Calhoun, Yale is stating that they consider his monetary contribution to the university more significant than the fact that he actively defended slavery, and the changing of this name shows a shifting of these values. In reality, the directors at Yale who both opposed and subsequently approved the name change did not change their values but were provided with better information from the investigation. In the absence of historical inquiry, people will make assumptions about historical figures, and those with places named after them will always be favored. However, when attention is brought to historical toponyms, the questioning of history that follows grants people a more comprehensive understanding of the past.

Changing a place’s name may seem like it has low stakes. After all, “naming and de-naming are symbolic acts that do not [in the case of Oregon University] materially end discrimination on campus” (Dennis). However, controversy provokes—if nothing else—questioning. Such inquisition into the questionable figures who “nominate our…buildings raises awareness of the past, prods historical inquiry, and implicitly argues the relevance of history itself” (Dennis). If studying a historical figure reveals that they are correctly honored, then there is still historical awareness to be gained. If the figure is found to be immoral by today’s standards, then the same awareness is gained, and changes can be made to make society more moral. The inquisition necessary for the maintenance of society’s historical health.

People generally act as though the name of places around their homes are connected to their generational identity and their way of life. Interestingly, this means that people’s view of history may reflect their view of themselves and their surroundings rather than the other way around. Practically, this means that people will celebrate the local toponyms if they are proud of their history and will find fault in the names if they wish to distance themselves from their ancestors. This is a logical fallacy and should be avoided. The recent increase in skepticism regarding figures who have been celebrated traditionally, especially through toponymics, is beneficial for the country. America’s history is complicated to say the least, and introspection is necessary to ensure that modern memorials reflect modern morals. 

Concerns have been raised about the erasure of history which may result from renaming places which take names from history. Those who hold these concerns argue that de-naming these places ignores history rather than addressing it. This argument is invalid on two counts, and both are exhibited through recent renaming on the campus of the University of Oregon. In 2016, Deady and Dunn Halls on the Oregon campus were stripped of their names. It had come to light that Dunn, a classics professor, had served as the Exalted Cyclops of the Klu Klux Klan and Dean had also exhibited racist behavior, although his legacy is more ambiguous and deserves deeper scrutiny (Dennis). Firstly, toponyms which reference controversial figures usually engage in more selective versions of history. Critics maintained that “the original designation [of Dunn Hall] was less an act of ‘history’ than of amnesia—of poorly informed public memory” (Dennis). In cases like this, misrepresentation can be more harmful than a lack of representation because it allows less room for change. Secondly, the controversy surrounding the renaming of the halls resulted in a more thorough understanding of the relevant history. Even though the result was the removal of the memorial, Oregonians were more historically aware after the process. In fact, before the issue was raised, little was known about the two former professors. If it weren’t for “the activism of African American students, few would have been able to produce a single biographical fact about Deady or Dunn” (Dennis). The process of debating the halls’ names did more for the advancement of public history than the maintenance of the monuments ever could have.

The discord surrounding Deady and Dunn also supports the earlier argument that, all else equal, some level of controversy is healthy for the public’s awareness of history. The affair spawned from the nationwide “self-scrutiny in the context of Black Lives Matter [and] the nationwide confrontation with our public commemorative landscape” (Dennis). In this way, the University of Oregon benefitted from healthy controversy as much as it created it.

Americans are increasingly self-conscious about how our successors will view us. This trend is due to a simultaneous increase in skepticism regarding the memorialization of our predecessors. Just as we interact with our ancestors by using the names they gave to locations or changing them, our successors will do the same. Through this cycle, toponyms are not only a channel of interaction between the public and history but are also a part of our continual contribution to history. The contemporary maxim ‘be a good ancestor’ which is used to advocate for socially inclusive behavior should also be applied to the language we use to refer to places to make sure the country will be welcoming to all demographics.

This heightened introspection is exhibited clearly in the renaming of Washington, D.C. and Yale’s Calhoun College. The District of Columbia has kept its name for centuries and Columbus has traditionally been celebrated, but within a few years Columbus been stripped of both the official holiday named after him—in favor of a holiday celebrating the people he wronged—and the city which takes his name. The memory of John Calhoun was not questioned since the initial naming of the Yale residence, and the insistent movement to replace his name is the manifestation of a larger national trend of renaming. The current controversy surrounding the memorialization of Americans that came before us will be looked back upon by future generations, and when it is, our actions in continuing to use or changing controversial toponyms will be considered.

There is much room for further analysis in the dynamics of toponymics and public history. Much of the analysis in this report dealt with the nation at large. Future analysis of public memory should consider the names used by locals about historical locations, and any movements to change such names. Because people tie the value of the historical namesake to the location which takes its name, it is worth comparing differences in how locals use place names and the reaction of the broader nation to the name.

Toponyms are one of the most tangible forms of public history. They can offer as much information about this history of a location than the location’s physical aspects. Because place names are so resistant to changing over time, it is necessary to remain skeptical to ensure that memorialization in the form of names are updated along with changes in societal values. It is also important to recognize when toponyms are or should be manipulated to sway public sentiment. Recent surges in American self-consciousness about our history and the memorial of the present will continue to act as a catalyst for the changing toponymic landscape in the coming years.

<div style="text-align:center">Works Cited</div>

Alderman, Derek H. “Street Names and the Scaling of Memory: The Politics of Commemorating Martin Luther King, Jr within the African American Community.” Area, vol. 35, no. 2, June 2003, pp. 163–173.

Beck, Lauren. "Euro-Settler Place Naming Practices for North America through a Gendered and Racialized Lens." Terrae Incognitae, vol. 53, no. 1, 20 Mar. 2021, pp. 1-21.

"Congressman Max Rose Votes To Change "Racist" Name of Washington, D.C. To Douglass Commonwealth." Shorefront News, 1 July 2020, (shorefrontnews.com/2020/07/01/congressman-max-rose-votes-to-change-racist-name-of-washington-d-c-to-douglas-commonwealth/)[http://shorefrontnews.com/2020/07/01/congressman-max-rose-votes-to-change-racist-name-of-washington-d-c-to-douglas-commonwealth/].

Dennis, Matthew, and Samuel Reis-Dennis. ""What's in a name?": The University of Oregon, De-Naming Controversies, and the ethics of Public Memory." Oregon Historical Quarterly, vol. 120, no. 2, Summer 2019.

McArthur, Lewis A. Oregon Geographic Names. 7th ed., Oregon Historical Society, 2003.

Peneva, Erin M. "The importance of memory and place: a narrative of Oregon Geographic Names with Lewis L. McArthur." Oregon Historical Quarterly, vol. 109, no. 3, Fall 2008, p. 446.

"Yale’s smart choice in renaming Calhoun College." The Washington Post, 18 Feb. 2017.