# Translation Comparison: _Beowulf_ and _Grendel's Mother_

_17 October 2021_

_This was my final paper for my class on_ Beowulf _for the fall 2021 semester_

---

Beowulf is a tale as old as time, yet continually proves to be timeless. The morals expressed in the original poem are augmented by the various translations, which apply varying levels of modernity to the text. Each translation and adaptation builds upon its predecessors to expose different aspects of the story which are missing from the translations and adaptations before it. One recent version of the tale of Beowulf is Grendel's Mother: The Saga of the Wyrd-Wife by Susan Signe Morrison. The tale told by Morrison is not a literal translation of the Anglo-Saxon poem. Instead, it is a cultural translation, told in the same voice of a more modern writer and meant for a 21st century audience. Morrison achieves this by employing the same literary devices as the 10th century author, but with opposing intents and effects. This turns the tale into a tragic, socially critical, and feminist saga, which highlights a critical element of the scholarship on Beowulf that preceded it: Grendel’s mother’s side of the story.

Both Beowulf and Grendel’s Mother are told from the perspective of a narrator. In the case of the former, it is a person of the time, likely a member of the court of Hrothgar or a neighboring tribe. This is the reason that ‘Hwæt’ is interspersed throughout the writing; it is a story meant to be retold, and is thus from the perspective of a storyteller. Maria Headley, a popular translator of Beowulf, explains in the introduction to her translation that “the entire poem...feels to [her] like the sort of competitive conversations [she has] often heard between men” (Headley xxi). Specifically, she imagines the narrator as a man telling a story at a bar.

Morrison challenges the reliability of this narrator. Given that the narrator was not directly involved in the events of the poem, the integrity of the information is not guaranteed. Morrison uses this undetermined truth to suggest that this version of the story actively spreads lies about the true story of Heorot hall. In Grendel’s Mother, the narrator is Sif, the daughter of a girl who came to Grendel’s mother (whose name is revealed to be Brimhild) for help when she was raped and became pregnant. (Morrison 174). Sif, being the apprentice to Brimhild, is able to provide a version of the story which is not twisted by those who are embarrassed by the real story. 

This means that Grendel’s Mother has significantly different plot points than Beowulf, which should be addressed before this paper continues. In Grendel’s Mother, Brimhild is a baby found in a basket on the river. She is taken in by a couple in Hrothgar’s kingdom, and when she is old enough she is sent to the court to learn the ways of kings and ladies. Eventually, she falls in love with Hrothgar, and they marry. Down the line, Brimhild’s true mother is found, and it comes out that Hrothgar is Brimhild’s father; he raped her mother while on a raid. Brimhild and her son are exiled. Grendel’s feud with the warriors of Heorot begins when he is denied an audience with his father/grandfather. Beowulf (who is homo- or bisexual) eventually arrives, and brings twelve men to ambush Grendel while he visits his beloved. After Grendel’s mother retaliates by killing Hrothgar’s main adviser, Beowulf confronts her in her hut in the swamp, where a Unferth drowns, as well as Beowulf’s lover. He attempts to rape her, but she tricks him into drinking her menstrual blood. He is shocked and falls out of her hut and into the swamp. When he is pulled out, he lies and says that he killed her. Eventually, people see through this story and Brimhild goes on to become a revered healer, and is especially protective of women who are raped.

Clearly, the narrator of the poem does not disclose any of this; in his retelling, Grendel is motivated out of pure contempt, Beowulf bests Grendel by merit, Hrothgar is a wise leader, and Grendel and his mother are outcast because they are descendants of Cain. All of this is omitted because it conveniently complements the cultural values which exempt Hrothgar and Beowulf from criticism. Sif is supporting evidence for the necessity of a reliable narrator.

Repetition is a literary strategy that is spun by Morrison to shine light on the shortcomings of the original poem. One line that repeats throughout the poem is “that was a good king” (Headley 11). This is because the story constantly questions what is means to earn and retain the title ‘good.’ The author of the surviving copy of Beowulf intended this to be a lesson in leadership and manhood, supported by the lengths the characters go to to protect their people. Repetition is used extensively in the adaptation as well. The line “that was a good king” (Morrison 15) is used once  in Grendel’s Mother to praise Hrothgar for being empathetic, but more often the author includes alterations of the phrase to highlight other roles which are important to a successful society which are ignored by the old tale. One of these such lines is “that was a good killing!” (Morrison 122), which appears at the end of a Norse myth about Odin killing Ymir. This line satirizes its counterpart by pointing out that, in this society, being a ‘good king’ is synonymous with battle and laying waste to neighboring tribes. A line which is repeated at the end of each section of Grendel’s Mother is “This once happened; so, too, this will pass.” (Morrison 66). At the end of the story, Brimhild is the last survivor, something she earned by advocating for the end of the feud, regardless of how deeply she was wronged. This is the opposite path taken by Beowulf, who seeks the ultimate vengeance on all who wrong him. The line ‘this will pass’ implies that everything will return to this state, where people who maintain their morality in times of conflict and favor forgiveness and can “turn aside cheek” (Morrison 22) are the only ones who find happiness. Morrison’s use of repetition in a similar fashion as the authors of Beowulf is a tactic which challenges many of the morals the book proclaims as truth.

The poem and the novel both contain a monologue meant to caution readers who would might be foolish enough to follow in the steps of the characters in the story. In Beowulf, Hrothgar delivers this speech, and warns Beowulf from thinking of himself as invincible. He warns that “God is good / … Sometimes He gives a man from a good clan room to roam / wherever he desires, every instant filled with joy / …God does this for so many decades that the man himself, / because men in the end are fools, forgets how things work. / …There’ll be no changes for him, / he thinks” (Headley 1724-34). This speech is very similar to one which Grendel’s mother gives on her deathbed. She reflects, “The scop’s song is still sung. He sings of the hero’s exploits...The killer is sung as the avenger, the pirate’s a tribute-seeker, the rapist a good king, only the peaceweaver [woman who follows tradition] is sung of with praise… The hero’s triumph overshadows the woman’s truth” (Morrison 189). This is a lament on the power of twisting stories in determining someone’s fate and on the marginalization that restricts women. Both of these are morals which could apply to readers of the contemporary era, and Morrison is not contradicting the message Hrothgar delivers. But where Brimhild’s message differs from her once beloved’s is how her message is more inclusive; Hrothgar is directing his message at men, who are the natural leaders in his eyes, while Brimhild is calling upon women to reject the narrative which disadvantages them and men to not contribute to the unsymmetrical cycle.

The feminism which is the driving force of Morrison’s interpretation is vocalized in this speech, and its omission from the text proves the point that Grendel’s mother was discredited in Beowulf. This bias extends into the scholarship on the poem. In the text as well as past analysis thereof, Grendel’s mother is “utterly defined, first, by her connection to her more textually-developed son, and, secondly, by her gender” (Burdorff 91-92). As one Beowulf scholar suggests, “Grendel’s  mother “has her own particular brand of otherness: her inhuman affiliation and propensities make it hard to distinguish what is monstrous from what is female”— [as Burdroff replies,] a reductively negative perspective that further reinforces the idea that any attempts to understand her significance must necessarily focus on her gender, if not explicitly on her maternity” (Burdroff 92). Not only does this stance reject the idea that Grendel’s mother was a rational being, it stifles suggestions about the possibility that she could add something to the story. More than Grendel’s mother, all female characters in this story are given minor roles. They  “perform unimportant tasks such as that of host supplying drinks to to heros [like Wealhtheow… [or] they act as peace-weavers [arranged marriages] attempting to stop a long-enduring feud between two others [like Freawaru]” (Ganguly 1). Morrison used the moment of Brimhild’s death to show that women have just as much, if not more, wisdom to share with the world.

Religious motifs are woven into each story in a structural fashion. In the now-questionable recount of Beowulf’s fight with Grendel’s mother, he is favored by God—notably, the god of Christianity. When she pins him and is about to finish him, her knife bends, and he is granted a sword: “Beowulf’s mail / shielded him, his shoulder safe in the sclerite of some / smith’s genius.../ That, too, was God’s work. / The Lord.../ had no trouble leveling the playing field / when Beowulf beat the count and stood” (Headley 1548-56). In this version of the fight, Beowulf is favored because he is acting in defense of the people of Heorot and embodies ‘good’ as defined by the culture of the time. This, and other religious allusion, are used to reinforce the belief of fate in the audience—that good will always prevail over evil, no matter the adversity. At the time the story took place, Heorot was not even fully Christian, according to Morrison’s narrator. Hrothgar’s brother, Jerome, is a missionary who attempts to convert his brother’s kingdom from their traditions of Norse mythology. Throughout the story, characters struggle to reconcile their traditional beliefs with new ones from the missionary. One of Hrothgar’s sons informs after time has passed that “the pope’s priests are as welcome as Odin’s votresses [in Heorot]. Let us embrace both ways if both can be used” (Morrison 178).  When Brimhild’s medicinal skill is compared to magic, she explains “medicine is not magic. God gave nature to help us. If I try to honor God by utilizing his gifts, I’m a good Christian. It’s true that some charms evoke Mother Earth and Odin. Their power still pervades these heathen climes” (Morrison 178). After Hrothgar’s passing, his former subjects become more analytical of the religion that they once blindly observed. Whereas Beowulf suggests that Christian faith is necessary because God’s influence is inescapable, Grendel’s Mother argues that the value of religion is in the lessons one can take away from it to improve oneself. This is a very postmodern view—it suggests that no set of principles is absolute, and the greatest lessons are learned from valuing all perspectives equally.

Beowulf and Grendel’s Mother are at odds with each other. Morrison uses similar writing patterns as the original author as a way of calling them out for being exclusive and misleading. They do, however, agree on one thing: “wrongs don’t go unavenged. Time makes sure of that” (Morrison 182). The difference here is that the authors of Beowulf believed that their values of good and evil were absolute and would persist, while Morrison challenges the reader’s preexisting bias to decide for themselves who was responsible for the wrongs, who deserved vengeance, and what vengeance truly means.

---

<center>Works Cited</center>

Burdorff, Sara Frances. “Re-Reading Grendel’s Mother: Beowulf and the Anglo-Saxon Metrical Charms.” Comitatus: A Journal of Medieval & Renaissance Studies, vol. 45, Sept. 2014, pp. 91–103.

Ganguly, Santanu. “How Many Heroes Are There in Beowulf: Rethinking of Grendel’s Mother as ‘Aglæcwif.’” Rupkatha Journal on Interdisciplinary Studies in Humanities, vol. 5, no. 3, Sept. 2013, pp. 161–166.

Headley, Maria D. Beowulf: A New Translation. MCD x FSG Originals, 2020.